src/plugins/toml/README.md, before:

- infos = Information about the toml plugin is in keys below
- infos/author = Jakob Fischer <jakobfischer93@gmail.com>
- infos/licence = BSD
- infos/provides = storage/toml
- infos/needs =
- infos/recommends = type
- infos/placements = getstorage setstorage
- infos/status = experimental unfinished nodoc
- infos/metadata = order comment/# comment/#/start comment/#/space
- infos/description = This storage plugin reads and writes TOML files, using Flex and Bison.

# TODO: Documentation

## Requirements:

    - The plugin needs Flex (TODO: min version) and Bison (TODO: min version).

## Limitations:

	- Comments and newlines between the last array element and closing brackets are discarded.
	- Trailing commas in arrays and inline tables are discarded
	- Comments/newlines between the last element of an array and the closing bracket are discarded.
	- Currently, no spaces are preserved.

## Questions

    - Don't know where/how exactly to store trailing array comments/newline info
        * Can't associate those info to array top key in the way like file ending comments are preserved
        * Maybe add own metakey (eg. epilogue/comment/#1)?

## TODOs
	- Document functions
	- ORDER on writing file
	- Preserve spaces
		- Before comments
		- Before array values
		- Before assignment/simple table header/table array header
	- Don't store origvalue, if transformed value is equal to untransformed value
    - Maybe use date plugin

Commit message:

toml: Some fixes to get error msg printed

src/plugins/toml/README.md, after:

- infos = Information about the toml plugin is in keys below
- infos/author = Jakob Fischer <jakobfischer93@gmail.com>
- infos/licence = BSD
- infos/provides = storage/toml
- infos/needs =
- infos/recommends = type
- infos/placements = getstorage setstorage
- infos/status = experimental unfinished nodoc
- infos/metadata = order comment/# comment/#/start comment/#/space
- infos/description = This storage plugin reads and writes TOML files, using Flex and Bison.

# TODO: Documentation

## Requirements:

    - The plugin needs Flex (TODO: min version) and Bison (TODO: min version).

## Limitations:

	- Comments and newlines between the last array element and closing brackets are discarded.
	- Trailing commas in arrays and inline tables are discarded
	- Comments/newlines between the last element of an array and the closing bracket are discarded.
	- Currently, no spaces are preserved.

## Questions

    - Don't know where/how exactly to store trailing array comments/newline info
        * Can't associate those info to array top key in the way like file ending comments are preserved
        * Maybe add own metakey (eg. epilogue/comment/#1)?
	- Don't know how to differentiate between empty keys / keys containing an empty string? (See storage plugin tutorial)
		* How can i affect this?

## TODOs
	- Document functions
	- ORDER on writing file
	- Error checks for writing
	- Maybe preserve spaces
		- Before array values
		- Before assignment/simple table header/table array header
	- Don't store origvalue, if transformed value is equal to untransformed value
    - Maybe use date plugin
