doc/tutorials/storage-plugins.md, before:

# How-To: Write a (Well Behaved) Storage Plugin

The [plugin tutorial](plugins.md) already covers some of the most interesting parts on how to write a (storage) plugin. This text will tell you a little bit more about how a storage plugin should act. While it is usually relatively easy to create a plugin that stores basic key-value pairs, adding advanced features such as support for

- [arrays](arrays.md), and
- [metadata](../dev/metadata.md),

takes more work. Before you continue with this text, please make sure that you read all of the linked documents above.

## Don’t Add Additional Keys

One common problem of storage plugins is, that they store too many keys. For example, if the user adds the keys

- `user/tests/storage/root` and
- `user/tests/storage/root/level1/level2/level3`,

then your plugin should only store those two keys. **Do not** add the keys

- `user/tests/storage/root/level1`, or
- `user/tests/storage/root/level1/level2`

to the key set. One plugin that handles this situation properly is [YAML CPP](/src/plugins/yamlcpp/), as the following [Markdown Shell Recorder][] test shows:

```sh
# Mount plugin
sudo kdb mount config.yaml user/tests/storage yamlcpp

# Add key-value pairs
kdb set user/tests/storage/root 🐓
kdb set user/tests/storage/root/level1/level2/level3 🐣

# Make sure that YAML CPP did not store any additional keys
kdb ls user/tests/storage/root
#> user/tests/storage/root
#> user/tests/storage/root/level1/level2/level3

# Undo modifications to the key database
kdb rm -r user/tests/storage
sudo kdb umount user/tests/storage
```

. For more information on why we allow “holes” in the hierarchy, please take a look [here](../decisions/holes.md).

[markdown shell recorder]: https://master.libelektra.org/tests/shell/shell_recorder/tutorial_wrapper

## Differentiate Between Empty Keys and Keys Containing an Empty String

Elektra supports both binary and textual values. The main difference between binary and textual data is that textual data always ends with a null byte. Therefore you are not allowed to store the code point `0` inside textual data. Binary data does not have this limitation.

The simplest textual data is the empty string (`""` = `0`) and has length 1, while the simplest binary data stores nothing at all and therefore has length 0. In the `kdb` utility you can disambiguate between these value by checking for the [metakey `binary`](../help/elektra-metadata.md). The following [Markdown Shell Recorder][] test shows how a storage plugin should handle these values.

```sh
# Mount plugin
sudo kdb mount config.yaml user/tests/storage yamlcpp

kdb set user/tests/storage/null
#> Create a new key user/tests/storage/null with null value
kdb get user/tests/storage/null
#>
kdb meta-ls user/tests/storage/null
#> binary

kdb set user/tests/storage/empty ''
#> Create a new key user/tests/storage/empty with string ""
kdb get user/tests/storage/empty
#>
kdb meta-ls user/tests/storage/empty
#>

# Undo modifications to the key database
kdb rm -r user/tests/storage
sudo kdb umount user/tests/storage
```

## Convert Boolean Data

Elektra uses [`0` and `1` to represent binary data](../decisions/boolean.md). A storage plugin that uses other values (e.g. `false` and `true`) needs to convert these values to `0` and `1`. The [Markdown Shell Recorder][] test below shows that [YAML CPP](../../src/plugins/yamlcpp/README.md) handles the conversion from and to [YAML’s boolean type](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html#id2803629) properly. In the test we also use the [`type` plugin](../../src/plugins/type/README.md) to makes sure that YAML CPP interacts correctly with this essential plugin.

```sh
# Mount plugin
sudo kdb mount config.yaml user/tests/storage yamlcpp type
kdb set user/tests/storage/bool/value true
kdb get user/tests/storage/bool/value
#> 1

kdb meta-set user/tests/storage/bool/value type boolean
kdb set user/tests/storage/bool/value 1
kdb get user/tests/storage/bool/value
#> 1

kdb set user/tests/storage/bool/value false
kdb get user/tests/storage/bool/value
#> 0

kdb set user/tests/storage/bool/value 'non boolean'
# RET: 5

kdb get user/tests/storage/bool/value
#> 0

# Undo modifications to the key database
kdb rm -r user/tests/storage
sudo kdb umount user/tests/storage
```

## Support Values Inside Non-Leaf Keys

Sometimes the most “natural” mapping of key-value pairs to a file format might cause a storage plugin to not be able to store values in so called directory (non-leaf) keys.

For example, in a key set that contains the keys:

```
user/directory
user/directory/leaf1
user/directory/leaf2
user/leaf3
```

, all keys at the bottom of the hierarchy:

```
        user
      /      \
  directory  leaf3
   /     \
leaf1   leaf2
```

, such as

- `user/directory/leaf1`
- `user/directory/leaf2`
- `user/leaf3`

are called leaf keys, while `user/directory` is a directory key. Plugins such as [YAJL](/src/plugins/yajl/) or [YAML CPP](/src/plugins/yamlcpp/) will not be able to store data in the key with the name `user/directory` directly. To work around this issue these plugin use the [Directory Value plugin](/src/plugins/directoryvalue/). In the ReadMe of the [Directory Value plugin](https://www.libelektra.org/plugins/directoryvalue) and [YAML CPP](https://www.libelektra.org/plugins/yamlcpp) you will find more information about this issue, and how to handle it.

The following Markdown Shell Recorder test shows **the proper behavior**:

```sh
# Mount plugin
sudo kdb mount config.yaml user/tests/storage yamlcpp

# Add key-value pair (leaf key)
kdb set user/tests/storage/root 🐓
# Since we add a key below `user/tests/storage/root`, the key
# `user/tests/storage/root` turns from a leaf key to a directory key.
kdb set user/tests/storage/root/level1/level2/level3 🐣

# Make sure that the directory key still stores the correct value
kdb get user/tests/storage/root
#> 🐓

# Check the value of the leaf key
kdb get user/tests/storage/root/level1/level2/level3
#> 🐣

# Undo modifications to the key database
kdb rm -r user/tests/storage
sudo kdb umount user/tests/storage
```

. To make sure that your storage plugin works correctly, please just replace `yamlcpp` with the name of your plugin and verify that the test above still works.

## Support Array And Non-Array Data Properly

You already learned about the array syntax in the [array tutorial](arrays.md). Now it is time to check, if your storage plugin supports array and non-array keys properly. Let us look at an concrete example. In the key set that contains keys with the following names:

```
user/tests/storage/array/#0
user/tests/storage/array/#1
user/tests/storage/map/#0
user/tests/storage/map/key
user/tests/storage/map/#1
```

the keys:

- `user/tests/storage/array/#0`, and
- `user/tests/storage/array/#1`

represent array elements, while

- `user/tests/storage/map/#0`, and
- `user/tests/storage/map/#1`

do not, since the key set also contains the key **`user/tests/storage/map/key`**. The following example shows that the storage plugin [YAML CPP](https://www.libelektra.org/plugins/yamlcpp) handles this situation properly:

```sh
# Mount plugin
sudo kdb mount config.yaml user/tests/storage yamlcpp

# Create an array containing two elements
kdb set user/tests/storage/array/#0 one
kdb set user/tests/storage/array/#1 two

# The plugin creates an array parent key
# that stores the basename of the last element
kdb meta-get user/tests/storage/array array
#> #1

# Add an array that contains a single element
kdb set user/tests/storage/map/#0
kdb meta-get user/tests/storage/map array
#> #0

# After we add `user/tests/storage/map/key`,
# `user/tests/storage/map` is not an array any more.
kdb set user/tests/storage/map/key three
kdb meta-get user/tests/storage/map array
# RET: 1

# Adding a another key that uses array syntax below
# `user/tests/storage/map` does not change this.
kdb set user/tests/storage/map/#1 four
kdb meta-get user/tests/storage/map array
# RET: 1

# If we remove the key `user/tests/storage/map/key`, then
# `user/tests/storage/map` represents an array again.
kdb rm user/tests/storage/map/key
kdb ls user/tests/storage/map
#> user/tests/storage/map
#> user/tests/storage/map/#0
#> user/tests/storage/map/#1
kdb meta-get user/tests/storage/map array
#> #1

# Undo modifications to the key database
kdb rm -r user/tests/storage
sudo kdb umount user/tests/storage
```

.

<!--
TODO: Add information on how plugins should store comment (meta)data
TODO: Document that a plugin should keep the ordering of key-value pairs of a document intact, when writing data back to the configuration file
TODO: Add section about relative keys (See also: https://issues.libelektra.org/51)
-->

Commit message:

doc: Adding doc for comments in storage plugins

doc/tutorials/storage-plugins.md, after:

# How-To: Write a (Well Behaved) Storage Plugin

The [plugin tutorial](plugins.md) already covers some of the most interesting parts on how to write a (storage) plugin. This text will tell you a little bit more about how a storage plugin should act. While it is usually relatively easy to create a plugin that stores basic key-value pairs, adding advanced features such as support for

- [arrays](arrays.md), and
- [metadata](../dev/metadata.md),

takes more work. Before you continue with this text, please make sure that you read all of the linked documents above.

## Don’t Add Additional Keys

One common problem of storage plugins is, that they store too many keys. For example, if the user adds the keys

- `user/tests/storage/root` and
- `user/tests/storage/root/level1/level2/level3`,

then your plugin should only store those two keys. **Do not** add the keys

- `user/tests/storage/root/level1`, or
- `user/tests/storage/root/level1/level2`

to the key set. One plugin that handles this situation properly is [YAML CPP](/src/plugins/yamlcpp/), as the following [Markdown Shell Recorder][] test shows:

```sh
# Mount plugin
sudo kdb mount config.yaml user/tests/storage yamlcpp

# Add key-value pairs
kdb set user/tests/storage/root 🐓
kdb set user/tests/storage/root/level1/level2/level3 🐣

# Make sure that YAML CPP did not store any additional keys
kdb ls user/tests/storage/root
#> user/tests/storage/root
#> user/tests/storage/root/level1/level2/level3

# Undo modifications to the key database
kdb rm -r user/tests/storage
sudo kdb umount user/tests/storage
```

. For more information on why we allow “holes” in the hierarchy, please take a look [here](../decisions/holes.md).

[markdown shell recorder]: https://master.libelektra.org/tests/shell/shell_recorder/tutorial_wrapper

## Differentiate Between Empty Keys and Keys Containing an Empty String

Elektra supports both binary and textual values. The main difference between binary and textual data is that textual data always ends with a null byte. Therefore you are not allowed to store the code point `0` inside textual data. Binary data does not have this limitation.

The simplest textual data is the empty string (`""` = `0`) and has length 1, while the simplest binary data stores nothing at all and therefore has length 0. In the `kdb` utility you can disambiguate between these value by checking for the [metakey `binary`](../help/elektra-metadata.md). The following [Markdown Shell Recorder][] test shows how a storage plugin should handle these values.

```sh
# Mount plugin
sudo kdb mount config.yaml user/tests/storage yamlcpp

kdb set user/tests/storage/null
#> Create a new key user/tests/storage/null with null value
kdb get user/tests/storage/null
#>
kdb meta-ls user/tests/storage/null
#> binary

kdb set user/tests/storage/empty ''
#> Create a new key user/tests/storage/empty with string ""
kdb get user/tests/storage/empty
#>
kdb meta-ls user/tests/storage/empty
#>

# Undo modifications to the key database
kdb rm -r user/tests/storage
sudo kdb umount user/tests/storage
```

## Convert Boolean Data

Elektra uses [`0` and `1` to represent binary data](../decisions/boolean.md). A storage plugin that uses other values (e.g. `false` and `true`) needs to convert these values to `0` and `1`. The [Markdown Shell Recorder][] test below shows that [YAML CPP](../../src/plugins/yamlcpp/README.md) handles the conversion from and to [YAML’s boolean type](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html#id2803629) properly. In the test we also use the [`type` plugin](../../src/plugins/type/README.md) to makes sure that YAML CPP interacts correctly with this essential plugin.

```sh
# Mount plugin
sudo kdb mount config.yaml user/tests/storage yamlcpp type
kdb set user/tests/storage/bool/value true
kdb get user/tests/storage/bool/value
#> 1

kdb meta-set user/tests/storage/bool/value type boolean
kdb set user/tests/storage/bool/value 1
kdb get user/tests/storage/bool/value
#> 1

kdb set user/tests/storage/bool/value false
kdb get user/tests/storage/bool/value
#> 0

kdb set user/tests/storage/bool/value 'non boolean'
# RET: 5

kdb get user/tests/storage/bool/value
#> 0

# Undo modifications to the key database
kdb rm -r user/tests/storage
sudo kdb umount user/tests/storage
```

## Support Values Inside Non-Leaf Keys

Sometimes the most “natural” mapping of key-value pairs to a file format might cause a storage plugin to not be able to store values in so called directory (non-leaf) keys.

For example, in a key set that contains the keys:

```
user/directory
user/directory/leaf1
user/directory/leaf2
user/leaf3
```

, all keys at the bottom of the hierarchy:

```
        user
      /      \
  directory  leaf3
   /     \
leaf1   leaf2
```

, such as

- `user/directory/leaf1`
- `user/directory/leaf2`
- `user/leaf3`

are called leaf keys, while `user/directory` is a directory key. Plugins such as [YAJL](/src/plugins/yajl/) or [YAML CPP](/src/plugins/yamlcpp/) will not be able to store data in the key with the name `user/directory` directly. To work around this issue these plugin use the [Directory Value plugin](/src/plugins/directoryvalue/). In the ReadMe of the [Directory Value plugin](https://www.libelektra.org/plugins/directoryvalue) and [YAML CPP](https://www.libelektra.org/plugins/yamlcpp) you will find more information about this issue, and how to handle it.

The following Markdown Shell Recorder test shows **the proper behavior**:

```sh
# Mount plugin
sudo kdb mount config.yaml user/tests/storage yamlcpp

# Add key-value pair (leaf key)
kdb set user/tests/storage/root 🐓
# Since we add a key below `user/tests/storage/root`, the key
# `user/tests/storage/root` turns from a leaf key to a directory key.
kdb set user/tests/storage/root/level1/level2/level3 🐣

# Make sure that the directory key still stores the correct value
kdb get user/tests/storage/root
#> 🐓

# Check the value of the leaf key
kdb get user/tests/storage/root/level1/level2/level3
#> 🐣

# Undo modifications to the key database
kdb rm -r user/tests/storage
sudo kdb umount user/tests/storage
```

. To make sure that your storage plugin works correctly, please just replace `yamlcpp` with the name of your plugin and verify that the test above still works.

## Support Array And Non-Array Data Properly

You already learned about the array syntax in the [array tutorial](arrays.md). Now it is time to check, if your storage plugin supports array and non-array keys properly. Let us look at an concrete example. In the key set that contains keys with the following names:

```
user/tests/storage/array/#0
user/tests/storage/array/#1
user/tests/storage/map/#0
user/tests/storage/map/key
user/tests/storage/map/#1
```

the keys:

- `user/tests/storage/array/#0`, and
- `user/tests/storage/array/#1`

represent array elements, while

- `user/tests/storage/map/#0`, and
- `user/tests/storage/map/#1`

do not, since the key set also contains the key **`user/tests/storage/map/key`**. The following example shows that the storage plugin [YAML CPP](https://www.libelektra.org/plugins/yamlcpp) handles this situation properly:

```sh
# Mount plugin
sudo kdb mount config.yaml user/tests/storage yamlcpp

# Create an array containing two elements
kdb set user/tests/storage/array/#0 one
kdb set user/tests/storage/array/#1 two

# The plugin creates an array parent key
# that stores the basename of the last element
kdb meta-get user/tests/storage/array array
#> #1

# Add an array that contains a single element
kdb set user/tests/storage/map/#0
kdb meta-get user/tests/storage/map array
#> #0

# After we add `user/tests/storage/map/key`,
# `user/tests/storage/map` is not an array any more.
kdb set user/tests/storage/map/key three
kdb meta-get user/tests/storage/map array
# RET: 1

# Adding a another key that uses array syntax below
# `user/tests/storage/map` does not change this.
kdb set user/tests/storage/map/#1 four
kdb meta-get user/tests/storage/map array
# RET: 1

# If we remove the key `user/tests/storage/map/key`, then
# `user/tests/storage/map` represents an array again.
kdb rm user/tests/storage/map/key
kdb ls user/tests/storage/map
#> user/tests/storage/map
#> user/tests/storage/map/#0
#> user/tests/storage/map/#1
kdb meta-get user/tests/storage/map array
#> #1

# Undo modifications to the key database
kdb rm -r user/tests/storage
sudo kdb umount user/tests/storage
```

## Comments

Comments existing in a file should be preserved with the help of the `comment/#` metakey. Each comment line is stored as an array element of that metakey. The metakeys should be assigned to the next read key (with an exception for file-ending comments).
The top-most comment has the index #1, while the comment directly above the key has the highest index in the comment array.
Inline comments (comments in the same line as the key) are stored with an index of #0.

The content of a comment line is directly saved in the value of the array element.
Additionally, each array element should also have two subkeys: `start` and `space`.
In the `start` metakey, the character(s) to start the comment are saved. If `start` is left empty, the line is considered to be an empty line.
The `space` metakey stores the amount of spaces before the comment starts (TODO: METADATA.ini states that it stores amount of space and tabs. But how can this be differentiated?).

Suppose we have a file config.yaml, containing the following comments and key/value pairs:
```yaml
# Comment for some_key with index 1
# Comment for some_key with index 2
# Comment for some_key with index 3
some_key: 12345    # Inline Comment of some_key, has index 0
# Comment for other_key with index 1
other_key: 0 # Inline Comment of other_key, has index 0
```

.

<!--
TODO: Add information on how plugins should store comment (meta)data
TODO: Document that a plugin should keep the ordering of key-value pairs of a document intact, when writing data back to the configuration file
TODO: Add section about relative keys (See also: https://issues.libelektra.org/51)
-->
